Add documentation for cardinality estimation (#4188)
grafana/mimir: docs/sources/mimir/operators-guide/architecture/query-sharding/index.md

`-querier.max-query-parallelism` by
`-query-frontend.query-sharding-total-shards`.

## Cardinality-estimation for query sharding (experimental)
Since a high number of parallel sharded queries increases load on queriers and their dependencies, it is desirable to shard queries only as much as necessary.
Queries that return more series (i.e., are of high cardinality) need to fetch more data and should therefore be split into a larger batch of shards, while queries that return few or no series should be executed with fewer or no shards at all.
When determining the number of shards to use for a given query, the sharding logic can optionally take into account the cardinality observed during previous executions of the same query for similar time ranges.

> To enable this experimental feature, set `-query-frontend.query-sharding-max-series-per-shard` to a value representing roughly how many series each shard should fetch, and enable result caching (the result cache is used to store cardinality estimates).

Reviewer: Sorry I'm late to this feature review, feel free to redirect me to RTFM or PR comments, but shouldn't this flag be `min-series-per-shard`? I understand that we want to have _at least_ a given number of series per shard.

Reviewer: Oh okay, maybe it's because I assumed that we start with the default sharding config as an upper bound and we restrict the number of shards, but instead of that this invalidates the default config and sets an unbounded number of shards?

Author: The idea is that we shard a query such that each individual shard is expected to fetch _at most_ this number of series, that's how the naming came about.

Reviewer: Does this mean that with `-query-frontend.query-sharding-max-series-per-shard=10` and 1M series, we're going to have 100K shards? Or is there any other limit involved?

Author: I think the logic here is that you start from a default of no sharding at all, and shard as long as you have to until this condition is satisfied, but no more.

Author: No, the previous limits all still hold, this will never lead to more shards than would have been used without this feature.

Reviewer: Okay, thanks, that makes it clear. Can you add this sentence to the docs please?

> The value set for this flag is one of several parameters used by the sharding logic to determine the appropriate number of shards for a query.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The value that you set for this flag is one of several parameters that sharding logic uses to determine the appropriate number of shards for a given query.
```

Author: Shouldn't it be 
```suggestion
The value that you set for this flag is one of several parameters that the sharding logic uses to determine the appropriate number of shards for a query.
```
?

Also am I correct to assume that to your generalized feedback here is to avoid the passive voice as much as possible?

Reviewer 2: Yes.

> Therefore, it will not strictly be complied with in all cases, and the actual number of series fetched per shard may exceed the limit.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Therefore, it will not strictly be complied with in all cases, and the actual number of series fetched per shard might exceed the limit.
```

> This is especially likely to happen in cases where cardinality of a query changes rapidly within a short period of time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is likely to happen in cases where the cardinality of a query changes rapidly within a short period of time.
```

`-querier.max-query-parallelism` by
`-query-frontend.query-sharding-total-shards`.

## Cardinality estimation for query sharding (experimental)

Since a high number of parallel sharded queries increases load on queriers and their dependencies, it is desirable to shard queries only as much as necessary.

> Queries that return more series, such as those that are of high cardinality, need to fetch more data and should therefore be split into a larger batch of shards.

Reviewer 3: [nit] Have you consider not using the word "batch" which could be misleading?

```suggestion
Queries that return more series, such as those that are of high cardinality, need to fetch more data and should therefore be split into a larger number of shards.
```

Queries that return few or no series should be executed with fewer or no shards at all.

> When determining the number of shards to use for a given query, the sharding logic can optionally take into account the cardinality observed during previous executions of the same query for similar time ranges.

Reviewer 3: @osg-grafana Is it fine to clarify what cardinality is, this way?

```suggestion
When determining the number of shards to use for a given query, the sharding logic can optionally take into account the cardinality (number of series) observed during previous executions of the same query for similar time ranges.
```

Reviewer 2: In the next generation of docs, we will have a topic about "What is cardinality?" that we can point people to. This current approach looks lean. Ship it. :)

> To enable this experimental feature, set `-query-frontend.query-sharding-max-series-per-shard` to a value representing roughly how many series each shard should fetch, and enable result caching (the result cache is used to store cardinality estimates).

Reviewer 3: I'm wondering if we should rename the param to `-query-frontend.query-sharding-recommended-series-per-shard` (or something similar). Now that I see the doc and the confusion generated to Oleg too, I think calling it "max" is not much clear because looks like an upper bound, while what we really configure is just an "hint".

Author: @colega's suggestion sounds like a nice way to phrase it to me. @pracucci wdyt?

Reviewer 3: I like it!

The value set for this flag is one of several parameters used by the sharding logic to determine the appropriate number of shards for a query.
Therefore, it will not strictly be complied with in all cases, and the actual number of series fetched per shard might exceed the limit.
This is likely to happen in cases where the cardinality of a query changes rapidly within a short period of time.

Estimates for query cardinality are only ever used to reduce the number of shards compared to the case when cardinality estimation is disabled.
Other parameters that limit the total number of shards, such as `-query-frontend.query-sharding-total-shards`, will still provide an upper bound for the number of shards even when cardinality estimation is enabled and would suggest the use of a higher number of shards.

> The histogram metric `cortex_query_frontend_cardinality_estimation_difference` tracks the difference between the estimated and actual number of series fetched per shard.

Reviewer 3: It's not per shard, since the CE middleware is before query sharding, so we get the result of the whole query (split by time) after query sharding.

```suggestion
The histogram metric `cortex_query_frontend_cardinality_estimation_difference` tracks the difference between the estimated and actual number of series fetched.
```

`-querier.max-query-parallelism` by
`-query-frontend.query-sharding-total-shards`.

## Cardinality estimation for query sharding (experimental)

> Since a high number of parallel sharded queries increases load on queriers and their dependencies, it is desirable to shard queries only as much as necessary.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Because a high number of parallel sharded queries increases the load on queriers and their dependencies, only shard queries as needed.
```

Author: This doesn't sound quite right to me. It's not the user that actively shards queries, which is why it sounds a bit strange to me to phrase this as a directive to the reader. This is just to point out in general that query sharding involves a tradeoff and should only be done by the software as much as is needed for a given query.

As always, you're the expert and I might be completely off 🤷‍♂️

> Queries that return more series (i.e., are of high cardinality) need to fetch more data and should therefore be split into a larger batch of shards, while queries that return few or no series should be executed with fewer or no shards at all.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Queries that return more series, such as those that are of high cardinality, need to fetch more data and should therefore be split into a larger batch of shards.
Queries that return few or no series should be executed with fewer or no shards at all.
```
